# Lexical Structure

## Introduction

Before program is interpreted, it should be read by *parser*. Input to parser is a sequence of tokens, that are generated by *Lexical analyzer*.

Lexical analyzer is intended to have more complex structure than it is common in other languages, including indentation and space-sensivity. Moreover, it has to dynamically gather information from language environment.

This chapter describes lexical analyzer and lexical structure of a program.

Programs are represented with sequences of Unicode characters. Unicode escapes (like ```\u2665```) can be used to represent program using only ASCII characters.

It is recommended to represent program with monospace characters as it relies on space and character length. Different-width characters will make program unreadable.

At the end of lexical analysis, sequence of unicode characters is reduced to sequence of tokens - input elements that are used in Parsing stage.

## Issues

+ No example for application with tabulations
+ Case when two indentation levels are overlapping is not explained
+ Should somehow redefine Tokens, Identifiers and Non-Space characters for making better explanation possible

## Notational Conventions

`[a]` - optional
`{a}` - zero or more repetitions
`(a)` - grouping
`a | b` - choice

## Split

Program is split into tokens. There are rules when split occurs.

If there is no space character between splitted tokens (excluding inner sides of braces), *No-Space* token is generated between splitted tokens. See **No-Space** section below.

On lexical analysis stage, there is variable number of *splitting sequences*. After each splitting sequence, split should occur.

## Tokens

Program is split to tokens. Unlike other languages, tokens here are not split by whitespace: indentation and linebreaks hold meaning as well. They go to parser as tokens. Here is lexical definition of token:

```
token ::= identifier
        | literal
        | tabulation
        | linebreak
        | no-space
        | brace
```

### Identifier

Identifier is any sequence of characters. Lexical definition of identifier:

```
identifier  ::= {letter | digit | punctuation | other}
letter      ::= lowercase | uppercase
lowercase   ::= "a"..."z"
uppercase   ::= "A"..."Z"
digit       ::= "0"..."9"
```

Punctuation and other are not strict sets of characters and lexical analyzer may support any number of monospace unicode characters. Lexical analyzer must support all visible ASCII characters.

Examples: `myIdentifier`, `a123bc`, `123a` (not possible to get because of split), `abc_a`


### Literal

+ Integer Literal `123`, `-12`, `00`
+ String Literal `"myString"`, `""`
+ Floating Point Literal `123.0`, `.043`, `25.`

### Tabulations

Consecutive spaces at beginning of line are used to create Tabulation token.

One tabulation token can represent multiple indentation levels: it may hold unsigned integer value.

Possible indentation levels are determined by previous line: 

+ At the beginning of the line
+ Third character of line
+ New indentation levels are set at the same distance from the beginning of line, where space character after non-space character is met on the previous line. 
+ If blah blah, then third character level will be the only. todo: explain

Here is an example of different indentation levels:

```
myFunction myArgument = 
0-1-------2----------3-4
```
Here is example of program that relies on this indentation scheme:

```
main args =
todo: nice example of program

```

If no readable token is seen on current line, tabulation token is not generated.

### Line Breaks

Line break is meaningful to parser. However, Lexer skips subsequent Line Break as the behaviour shouldn't change depending on number of line-breaks in the row.

### No-Spaces

Operator priority can be manipulated using No-Space tokens, so parser should know where exactily No-Space is used.

Writing two tokens without spaces increases operator priority to make usage more comfortable.

Here are some examples

```
print sin(x) // the same as "print(sin x))"
print sin x  // the same as "(print sin)(x)"

print a+b    // the same as "print(a+b)"
print a + b  // the same as "(print a) + b"
```

Following two expressions are intended to mean different things

```
print (2 + 2 * 2)
print (2+2 * 2)
```

Cases when No-Space token is included between tokens (todo: need common name for identifier and splitting sequence and possibly splitting sequence and brace):

+ No space between splitting sequence and identifier
+ No space between splitting sequence and splitting sequence
+ No space between identifier and opening brace at right
+ No space between closing brace at left and identifier

### Opening & Closing Braces

There are multiple kinds of opening braces:

+ Parenthesis `(abc)`, `()`
+ Brackets `[1, 2, 3]`
+ Curly braces `{1, 2, 3}`
+ Tags `<myIdentifier>abc</myIdentifier>` - those can hold any identifier inside and basically mean function application

## Comments

```
// This is single-line comment
/*
This is multi-line comment
*/
```
